[docs] Formatting and proper noun tune-up (#4200)
drud/ddev: docs/content/users/install/performance.md

# Performance

> DDEV is continually focused on quick project startup and fast responses to its web requests. DDEV’s performance is mostly an issue of how Docker runs on your host machine.

Author: I’ll do a thorough check for “host machine” phrasing that could be “workstation”. 👍

    
    ### Enabling and Disabling Mutagen

    !!!warning "Don’t Install Mutagen"
        Don’t install the `mutagen` binary separately. If it’s not available, DDEV will install and upgrade it for you.

    We recommend enabling Mutagen globally with `ddev config global --mutagen-enabled`. You can disable it again with `ddev mutagen reset && ddev config global --mutagen-enabled=false`.

    If you’d rather use Mutagen on a specific project, run `ddev stop`, enable it with `ddev config --mutagen-enabled`, and `ddev start` again.

    You can’t disable Mutagen on individual projects if it’s enabled globally.
    
    To stop using Mutagen on a project, run `ddev mutagen reset && ddev config --mutagen-enabled=false`.
    
    The `nfs-mount-enabled` feature is automatically turned off if you’re using Mutagen.
    

>     ### Windows Mutagen and Executable Files

Reviewer: This is now fixed, so we can remove

```suggestion
```

Author: Not to be exceedingly dull, but you’re recommending we remove the entire section and not just the heading, right?

>     Mutagen on Windows doesn’t properly set your project files as executable, so commands like `ddev exec drush` or `ddev craft` will likely fail. You can get around this using a post-start [hook](../configuration/hooks.md) to set the appropriate directories as executable:
>     
>     ```yaml
>     hooks:
>       post-start:
>       - exec: "chmod +x /var/www/html/vendor/bin/* /var/www/html/node_modules/.bin/*"
>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    ### Mutagen and User-Generated Uploads

    When Mutagen is enabled, DDEV attempts to exclude user-generated files in `upload_dir`—when it exists—from syncing. It does this by using a bind-mount in the generated docker-compose configuration, and excluding the directory from syncing in `.ddev/mutagen/mutagen.yml`. This behavior is automatic and you shouldn’t have to take any action in most cases.

    If you have a non-standard location for user-generated files, like `private/fileadmin` with the deprecated `typo3-secure-web` approach, you should override the project defaults by setting `upload_dir` in `.ddev/config.yaml` and pointing it at the correct directory. This will allow Mutagen to sync correctly.

    ### Mutagen Integration Caveats
 
    If you run into an issue with Mutagen, please try to recreate and report it via a [support channel](../support.md)!

    Mutagen has generally been great for those using it, but it’s good to be aware of its trade-offs:

    * **It’s not the right choice for every project.**  

>     If filesystem consistency—as opposed to performance—is your highest priority, then there are reasons to be cautious. Two-way sync is a very difficult computational problem, and problems *may* surface. (We haven’t seen any major issues yet!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Filesystem consistency has been excellent with Mutagen, but performance is its specialty. If consistencyis your highest priority, then there are reasons to be cautious. Two-way sync is a very difficult computational problem, and problems *may* surface. 
```

>     If filesystem consistency—as opposed to performance—is your highest priority, then there are reasons to be cautious. Two-way sync is a very difficult computational problem, and problems *may* surface. (We haven’t seen any major issues yet!)

Author: ```suggestion
    Filesystem consistency has been excellent with Mutagen, but performance is its specialty. If consistency is your highest priority, then there are reasons to be cautious. Two-way sync is a very difficult computational problem, and problems *may* surface.
```

    * **Avoid file changes when DDEV is stopped.**  
    If you change files—checking out a different branch, removing a file—while DDEV is stopped, Mutagen has no way to know about it. When you start again, it will get the files that are stored and bring them back to the host. If you *do* change files while DDEV is stopped, run `ddev mutagen reset` before restarting the project so Mutagen only starts with awareness of the host’s file contents.

>     * **It increases disk usage.**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * **It modestly increases disk usage.**  
```

    * Try `ddev poweroff` or `~/.ddev/bin/mutagen daemon stop && ~/.ddev/bin/mutagen daemon start` to restart the Mutagen daemon if you suspect it’s hanging.
    * Use `ddev mutagen reset` if you suspect trouble, and *always* after changing `.ddev/mutagen/mutagen.yml`. This restarts the project’s Mutagen data (Docker volume + Mutagen session) from scratch.
    * `ddev mutagen monitor` can help watch Mutagen behavior. It’s the same as `~/.ddev/bin/mutagen sync monitor <syncname>`.
    * `ddev debug mutagen` will let you run any Mutagen command using the binary in `~/.ddev/bin/mutagen`.
    * If you’re working on the host and expecting things to show up immediately inside the container, you can learn a lot by running `ddev mutagen monitor` in a separate window as you work. You’ll see when Mutagen responds to your changes and get an idea about how much delay there is.
    * Consider `ddev stop` before massive file change operations, like moving a directory.
    * If you get in real trouble, run `ddev stop`, reset your files with Git, and run `ddev mutagen reset` to throw away the Docker volume which may already have incorrect files on it.

    #### Advanced Mutagen Troubleshooting

>     Most people get the insight they need running `ddev mutagen monitor` and watching the results, but you can also enable full logging:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Most people get the insight they need running `ddev mutagen status --verbose` and `ddev mutagen monitor` and watching the results, but you can also enable full logging:
```

    * `killall mutagen`
    * `export MUTAGEN_DATA_DIRECTORY=~/.ddev_mutagen_data_directory`
    * `export MUTAGEN_LOG_LEVEL=debug` or `export MUTAGEN_LOG_LEVEL=trace`
    * `~/.ddev/bin/mutagen daemon run`
    
    Work with your project and watch the output.

    When you’re done, run `ddev poweroff` and <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd> the running Mutagen daemon to get back to normal.

    ### Mutagen Strategies and Design Considerations

    Mutagen provides enormous speed boosts in everyday usage, but it’s trying desperately under the hood to keep container changes reflected on the host and vice versa.
    
    DDEV mounts a fast Docker volume onto `/var/www/html` inside the `web` container, then delegates to the Mutagen daemon (on the host). That daemon has the job of keeping all host project contents in sync with the contents of the Docker volume.
    
    Consistency is a high priority for DDEV’s integration, which tries at key points to make sure everything is completely consistent and in sync.
    
    The Mutagen daemon’s life cycle and sync sessions are something like this:

    1. On `ddev start`, the Mutagen agent will be started if it’s not already running.

>     2. If there’s already a sync session for the project, it’s stopped and recreated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. If there’s already a sync session for the project, it’s resumed.
```

>     3. On `ddev stop` and `ddev pause`, the sync session is flushed to ensure consistency, then terminated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. On `ddev stop` and `ddev pause`, the sync session is flushed to ensure consistency, then paused.
```

    A synchronous flush happens after any `ddev composer` command, since Composer may cause massive changes to the filesystem inside the container that need to be synced before operation continues.
    
    If you need to reset everything for a project, you can do it with `ddev mutagen reset`, which starts the Mutagen session from scratch and removes the Docker volume so it can be recreated from scratch.

>     ### Interaction with Other Usages of Mutagen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ### Safe to Use with Other Mutagen Installations
```

>     DDEV requires and provides a specific version of Mutagen, which you can see with `ddev version`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    DDEV requires and provides a specific version of Mutagen, which you can see with `ddev version`.  If another `mutagen` instance or daemon is installed on your workstation it doesn't matter, because DDEV's version runs separately and uses a different data directory.
```

>     Mutagen does not guarantee interoperability between different Mutagen versions, so you may have trouble if you have another version of Mutagen installed. You can find out what version of Mutagen you may have installed outside DDEV with `mutagen version`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     You’ll want your system’s Mutagen version to be the same as the one provided with DDEV. If you’re using Mutagen for anything else, follow Mutagen’s [installation instructions](https://mutagen.io/documentation/introduction/installation) to install the required version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    3. Test that NFS is working correctly by using `ddev debug nfsmount` in a project directory. The first line should report something like “Successfully accessed NFS mount of /path/to/project”.
    4. Enable NFS mounting globally with `ddev config global --nfs-mount-enabled`.  
    You can also configure NFS mounting on a per-project basis with `ddev config --nfs-mount-enabled` in the project directory, but this is unusual. If NFS mounting is turned on globally, it overrides any local project settings for NFS.
    5. `ddev start` your project and make sure it works normally. Use `ddev describe` to verify that NFS mounting is being used. The NFS status is near the top of the output of `ddev describe`.

    !!!tip "Skip step 2 if you’re already using NFS!"
        If you’re already using NFS with Vagrant on macOS, for example, and you already have a number of exports, the default home directory export here won’t work—you’ll have overlaps in your `/etc/exports`. Or on Windows, you may want to use an NFS server other than [Winnfsd](https://github.com/winnfsd/winnfsd) like the [Allegro NFS Server](https://nfsforwindows.com).  

>         The recommendations and scripts below are for getting you started if you *don’t* already use NFS.

Reviewer: I have yet to run into anybody who already had NFS deployed for something else...

        #### Debugging `ddev start` Failures with NFS Mount Enabled

        There are a number of reasons the NFS mount can fail on `ddev start`:

        * Firewall issues.
        * NFS Server not running.
        * Trying to start more than one NFS server.
        * Overlapping NFS exports, typically an issue if you’ve established another NFS client like Vagrant. You’ll need to reconfigure your exports paths so they don’t overlap.
        * Path of project not shared in `~/.ddev/nfs_exports.txt`.

        To debug and solve permission problems:

        * Try `ddev debug nfsmount` in a project directory to see if basic NFS mounting is working. If that works, everything else probably will too.
        * When debugging, run `ddev restart` in between each change. Otherwise, you can have stale mounts inside the container and you’ll miss any benefit you may find in the debugging process.
        * Inspect `~/.ddev/nfs_exports.txt`.
        * Restart the server with `sudo nssm restart nfsd`.

        #### Windows-specific NFS debugging

>         * Temporarily disable any firewall or VPN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        * Temporarily disable any firewall, VPN, or virus checker.
```

        6. `nssm` logs failures and what it’s doing to the system event log. Run Event Viewer and filter events:  
            ![Windows Event Viewer](../images/windows_event_viewer.png)
        7. Please make sure you’ve excluded `winnfsd` from the Windows Defender Firewall per the installation instructions above.
        8. On Windows 10/11 Pro you can visit *Turn Windows features on or off* and enable *Services for NFS* → *Client for NFS*. The `showmount -e` command will then show available exports on the current machine. This can help find out if a conflicting server is running or identifying a problem with exports.

## Freeing Up System Resources

Every project you run uses system resources, and may compete for those resources. A reasonable practice is to individually stop projects you’re not using. You could also stop all projects with `ddev poweroff` and only start the one you’re working on. `ddev list` will display all your projects along with each one’s status.

## Docker Desktop for Mac Settings

> Open Docker Desktop’s *Preferences*, and visit *Resources* → *Advanced*. Here you can adjust the CPUs, memory, and disk allocated to Docker. The defaults work well for a small project or two, but you may want to adjust these upward based on your experience. The default memory allocation is 2GB, but many people raise it to 4-5GB or higher. The disk allocation almost always needs to be raised to accommodate increased downloaded images. Your experience will determine what to do with CPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Docker Desktop’s *Preferences*, and visit *Resources* → *Advanced*. Here you can adjust the CPUs, memory, and disk allocated to Docker. The defaults work well for a small project or two, but you may want to adjust these upward based on your experience. Most people raise the memory allocation to 6GB or higher. The disk allocation almost always needs to be raised to accommodate increased downloaded images. Your experience will determine what to do with CPUs.
```
